---
layout: simple
math: true
---

# Assignment 3

CMPT 295 – Fall 2021

Objectives:

* Memory addressing modes

* Assembly instructions

* Reading object code (machine level instruction) expressed in hexadecimal and
understanding how these instructions are stored in memory

* Writing a C program that corresponds to given assembly program

Submission:

* Submit your document called Assignment_3.pdf, which must include the number of the
question you are answering (e.g., Question 1) followed by your answer, keeping the
questions in their original numerical order. Formatting your assignment document this
way makes it a lot easier to mark. 
o Add your full name and student number at the top of the first page of your
document.

* **If you write your answers by hand (as opposed to using a computer application to
write them)**, when putting your assignment document together, do not take photos of
your assignment sheets! Scan them instead! Better quality -> easier to read -> easier to
mark!

Due: 

* Friday Oct. 8 at 4pm on CourSys
* Late assignments will receive a grade of 0, but they will be marked (if they are submitted
before the solutions are posted on Monday) in order to provide feedback to the
student.

Marking scheme:
* This assignment will be marked as follows:
  * Questions 1, 2 and 3 will be marked for correctness.
* The amount of marks for each question is indicated as part of the question.
* A solution will be posted on Monday after the due date.

<hr>

## 1. [10 marks] Memory addressing modes

Assume the following values are stored at the indicated memory addresses and registers:

Memory Address|Value
0x230|0x23
0x234|0x00
0x235|0x01
0x23A|0xed
0x240|0xff

Register|Value
%rdi|0x230
%rsi|0x234
%rcx|0x4
%rax|0x1

Imagine that the operands in the table below are the Src (source) operands for some
unspecified assembly instructions (any instruction except lea\*), fill in the following table
with the appropriate answers.

Note: We do not need to know what these assembly instructions are in order to fill the table.

Operand|Operand Value (expressed in hexadecimal)|Operand Form (Choices are: immediate, Register, or one of the 9 Memory Addressing Modes)
%rsi||Register
(%rdi)||Indirect memory addressing mode
$0x23A||
0x240|0xff|
10(%rdi)||"Base + displacement" memory addressing mode
560(%rcx,%rax)||
-550(, %rdi, 2)||
0x6(%rdi, %rax, 4)||


Still using the first table listed above displaying the values stored at various memory
addresses and registers, fill in the following table with three different Src (source) operands
for some unspecified assembly instructions (any instruction except lea\*). For each row,
this operand must result in the operand Value listed and must satisfy the Operand Form
listed.


Operand|Value|Operand Form (Choices are: Immediate, Register or one of the 9 Memory Addressing Modes)
|0x00|Absolute memory addressing mode
|0x00|Scaled indexed memory addressing mode
|0x00|Indexed memory addressing mode

## 2. [2 marks] Machine level instructions and their memory location

Consider a function called arith, defined in a file called arith.c and called from the
main function found in the file called main.c.

This function arith performs some arithmetic manipulation on its three parameters.

Compiling main.c and arith.c files, we created an executable called ar, then we
executed the command:

<pre class="terminal">
objdump –d ar > arith.objdump
</pre>

We display the partial content of arith.objdump below. The file arith.objdump is
the disassembled version of the executable file ar.
Your task is to fill in its missing parts, which have been underlined:

<pre class="terminal">
0000000000$400527 &lt;arith&gt;:
400527:   48 8d 04 37       lea   (%rdi,%rsi,1),%rax
______:   48 01 d0          add   %rdx,%rax
40052e:   48 8d 0c 76       lea   (%rsi,%rsi,2),%rxc
______:   48 c1 e1 04       shl   $0x4,%rcx
400536:   48 8d 54 0f 04    lea   0x4(%rdi,%rcx,1),%rdx
______:   48 0f af c2       imul  %rdx,%rax
______:   c3                retq
</pre>

## 3. [8 marks] C program versus assembly program

Do the Homework Problem 3.58 at the end of Chapter 3. Make sure you satisfy the following requirements:

* Your code must be commented and well spaced such that others (i.e., TA’s) can read
your code and understand what each instruction does.
* About comments:
  * Comment of Type 1: Here is an example of a useful comment: `cmpl  %edx, %r8d # loop while j < N`
  * Comment of Type 2: Here is an example of a not so useful comment: `cmpl  %edx, %r8d # compare %edx with %r8d`
  * Do you see the difference? Make sure you write comments of Type 1.
* You cannot use the goto statement.
* You must write your program using C (not C++) and your program must compile on our *target machine*.

Once you have created your program and saved it in a file called decode2.c, generate its
assembly code version using the optimization level “g” (–Og) and save it in a file called
decode2.s.

Include the content of both files decode2.c and decode2.s in your assignment

Assignment_3.pdf document. Label them well.

You do not have to electronically submit your files decode2.c and decode2.s on
CourSys. However, your program must be functionally correct (i.e., it must compile,
execute properly and solve this problem).

