---
layout: post
title: "NAS Part 1: Theorize"
---
New Project, phase one:
Theorize.

I want to build a NAS server to store a bunch of data on. Current problem is lack of a computer to accept multiple SATA connections.

### Problem 1: SATA connectors

This can be solved by an HBE card. Although they tend to be quite expensive (250+).
One decent model that isn't that much is the [LSI 9211-8I](https://www.amazon.ca/SAS9211-8I-8PORT-Int-Sata-Pcie/dp/B002RL8I7M/ref=sr_1_2?keywords=9211-8i&qid=1586699707&sr=8-2).
This is ideal for future expansion.

A cheaper option is a PCIe multi-SATA connector [like this](https://www.amazon.ca/Rivo-Controller-Expansion-Profile-Non-Raid/dp/B0836MKFCR?ref_=ast_slp_dp).

Either work, but one is cheaper and the other is more expandable.
The 9211-8I uses two SAS ports, which can be expanded indefinetely. SAS supports splitting.
SATA can be connected in a 4:1 ratio to SAS connectors with some [cheap cables](https://www.amazon.com/Cable-Matters-Internal-SFF-8087-Breakout/dp/B012BPLYJC).

### Problem 2: Drives
I do not have enough drives to make this work right now.
For the setup I want it would require 5 or 6 drives.
I will get 4-5 drives worth of space as one drive worth of space is dedicated to "parity", making you able to:

1. Verify data integrity. If anything goes wrong with a write, it will be fixed automatically.
2. If *one* drive dies, the system can stay online with no problem. Two drives and I'm eff-you-see-kay-ed-dee.

My other option is to use two drives worth of space for partiy.
This would only have me 3-4 drives of space, but
this system can withstand the failure of *two* drives.

### Problem 3: Computer System

I currently have 5 computers.

1. Celery Stick. An old grey HP laptop with a Braille stickered keyboard. *Does not work right now; bad thermal paste job.*
2. A Dell laptop lent to me by my school during my studies.
3. Houston. A 21-inch 2011 iMac for which the screen does not work under Linux (excep with the `nomodeset` kernel option enabled).
4. An Old Toshiba laptop (circa 2010) that I got for $50 to test with OpenBSD (works....sometimes).
5. Main Rig. My main laptop is an ASUS-705 TUF gaming laptop.

None of these have PCIe expansion slots with a case that can handle the new drives.

So my search for a cheaper tower/case to work with to use the PCIe slots in continues.

I'm in for a fun ride.... and a few monnies.
