---
title: "BSD Journey, Part 1"
layout: post
---

As Linux becomes controlled by corporate sponsors and becomes more full of proprietary blobs, drivers, and even closed-source software like Steam,
One may wonder if there are other options out there.
For me, somebody that is intensely interested in security, there is one option: OpenBSD.

Now, my interest in OpenBSD has been going on for a long time.
I started poking around for Linux alternatives way back a few years ago when Linus Torvalds decided to leave after he got in trouble for some
[unprofessional behaviour](https://arstechnica.com/information-technology/2013/07/linus-torvalds-defends-his-right-to-shame-linux-kernel-developers/).
That said, Linus did come back to Linux development,
but I knew that his abrasive style is what brought good code to the Linux kernel.
I also knew that his ability to be critical would be hurt by the new
[code of conduct](https://itsfoss.com/linux-code-of-conduct/).
It would become a tool for the SJW types to hammer of Linus for being a "white male, et al.";
It would become a tool for the easily offended to use to get their dumb code into Linux;
It would become a tool for the corporatization, the HR-ification of Linux.
Frankly, this does not interest me.

Now I'm sure that OpenBSD has its own internal policies that I disagree with.
That said, Theo De Raadt is still at least known for calling Firefox an "amorphous peace of garbage" due to its lack of privilege separation.
And, in their [project goals](https://openbsd.org/goals.html) page, they specifically mention:

> Be as politics-free as possible; solutions should be decided on the basis of technical merit.

Now that's something I can get behind!
Bet you that's not in the Linux COC?

He also went to university in my hometown, so that's pretty cool!
I can support a local madman who thinks he can make a better operating system than all those corporations.
Maybe he was right, maybe not. What I know is I am excited to find out!

Wish my luck on my OpenBSD journey. I will post updates here along the way.

Happy hacking!
